
Assassin Vine
See Strangle Vine on page 154.

Aurochs
See Cattle (including Aurochs and Bison) on page 15.

Bison
See Cattle (including Aurochs and Bison) on page 15.

Black Pudding
See Jelly, Black on page 94.

Elemental*
An elemental is a being formed from one of the foundational elements of reality.  In Western traditions, the classical elements are air, earth, fire, and water; Asian traditions include a different group: fire, earth, metal, water, and wood.  This book presents the full range needed for either tradition, and to those types are added cold and lightning elementals for those who wish to be less traditional.  As always, the Game Master decides what sort of monsters appear in their world, and so not all of the following creatures may be encountered.
Each type of elemental may be summoned to the material plane by means of one of three different methods:
Conjured by the 5th level Magic-User spell conjure elemental; or,
Summoned by means of a magical staff; or,
Summoned by a device, as given in the Miscellaneous Magic subsection of the Treasure section of this book.
These three types of elementals are quite reasonably called staff, device, and conjured elementals.  The hit dice of an elemental depends on the type, as follows:
Type
Hit Dice
Staff
8
Device
12
Conjured
16
The summoner of an elemental must concentrate on it to control it, and may take no other action, including attacking, being attacked, or moving, or control will be lost.  Once control is lost it cannot be regained, and the uncontrolled elemental will move directly toward the summoner and attack.
Elementals must be summoned from a large quantity of the appropriate natural material.  For example, air elementals require a large quantity of air (so small underground spaces will not support the summoning of one); earth elementals require access to natural earth or stone (and worked stone such as the stone walls of a castle will not work); fire elementals require a large fire such as a bonfire; and water elementals require access to a substantial body of water, at the very least a river or lake (small streams and artificial pools will not work).  Finally, when an elemental is summoned, no other elemental of the same type may be summoned in the same day within a radius of 100 miles of the location.
Non-magical weapons cannot harm an elemental.  Attacks made by an elemental should be considered magical for purposes of determining how much damage creatures resistant to the elemental's attack form should suffer.
Generally, elementals are immune to both normal and magical forms of their own attack form.  Most are more susceptible to attacks from one or two specific other types of elemental; this is noted in the text for each type.

Gelatinous Cube
See Jelly, Glass on page 95.

Ghast
See Ghoul (and Ghast) on page 62.

Golem*
Golems are a kind of construct, a creature created from non-living matter and animated by application of magic.  The powers required to animate a golem are prodigious, and involve summoning, capturing, and binding an elemental spirit to the constructed body.  This process also binds the golem to the will of its creator.
They are mindless, and thus immune to magics affecting the mind such as sleep, charm, hold, and any form of mind reading or telepathy.  They must be given explicit, detailed instructions verbally, and the controller must be within 60 feet of the golem to do so.  If not actively being commanded, a golem will follow the last instructions given to it until the controller returns.  If such a golem is attacked, it will fight in its own defense but will usually not pursue the attackers if they flee.  The controller can order the golem to follow the commands of another, but can always resume control if desired (i.e. the controller's commands always take precedence).
Employing a golem in combat is tricky, for once one attacks an opponent there is a cumulative 1% chance each round (so 1% the first round, 2% the second, 3% the third, and so on) that the golem will stop following commands and become berserk.  Once this happens the golem will attack any creature in range, choosing targets randomly when there are more than one.  If all targets are killed or driven away the golem will move on, looking for more creatures to kill and breaking down any barrier that stands in its way if it is at all possible.
The berserk chance for a golem that is still under control is reset to 0% only when the golem is inactive, neither attacking nor being attacked, for one full round.
The creator of the golem (but not any other person who might have been delegated control) may try to calm the golem, speaking firmly to it to convince it to stop.  The creator needs to succeed at a saving throw vs. Spells to do this, after spending a round talking to the golem.  If this roll fails the golem turns its attention to the creator and pursues them with single-minded hatred.
If a berserk golem is unable to attack anyone for 5 rounds it resumes its inactive state, and the controller can again give it commands.  If it begins to pursue its creator, though, it will never stop no matter how long it takes, and must normally be trapped or destroyed to stop it.  It has no special way to find the creator, however, and will become inactive if it loses sight of the creator for a minimum of 1 day.  If the golem is successfully calmed, it can be given commands again on the very next round of combat.
As their bodies are made of non-living matter, golems can only be hit by magical weapons.  Conversely, they are less resistant to various effects due to the fact that they are not living creatures; in general, golems save as if they were Fighters of 1/2 their hit dice in levels.  For example, a Bone Golem has 8 hit dice, but saves as a Fighter of 4th level.

Gray Ooze
See Jelly, Gray on page 96.

Green Slime
See Jelly, Green on page 97.

Jelly
Jellies are strange creatures made of amorphous protoplasm.  They are similar to tiny single-celled creatures such as a few wizards may have studied using magic, but far larger.  Jellies are always completely non-intelligent, and are thus immune to sleep or charm magic as well as any form or mind reading or telepathy.  Generally they also do not check morale, but simply move toward any potential meal and attack automatically.

Living Statue
Living statues are magically animated.  They are true automatons, unlike golems, which are animated by elemental spirits.  While this means that living statues have no chance of going "berserk," it also means that they may only perform simple programmed activities.  They may not be commanded in any meaningful fashion.  They make very effective guards for tombs, treasure rooms, and similar places.
Living statues can be crafted to resemble any sort of living creature, but most commonly are made to look like the type of humanoid which crafted them.

Lycanthrope*
Lycanthropes are humans who transform into animals or animal-human hybrid forms; the exact nature of the transformation varies between specific types.  They look like ordinary humans when not transformed, though lycanthropes who have been afflicted for a long time sometimes begin to resemble their animal form even when not transformed.  An animal form will usually appear larger and stronger than normal animals of the same type, and some say you can see the intelligence of a human in their eyes, if you dare to get close enough.
This affliction is in fact a kind of magical disease, though it is not susceptible to the cure disease spell.  Any human who loses half or more of their hit points due to lycanthrope bite and/or claw attacks will subsequently contract the same form of lycanthropy in 3d6 days.  For non-Human characters or creatures, contracting the disease is fatal in the same time period.  A cure disease cast before the onset is complete will stop the progress of the disease, but once the time has elapsed, the transformation is permanent.
When first infected, most lycanthropes cannot control their changes and will transform when stressed or under some other type-specific circumstances.  After around two to three years, they gain the ability to change at will, and may attempt to resist involuntary transformation by means of a saving throw vs. Paralysis.
In animal or hybrid form lycanthropes may be hit only by silver or magical weapons.

Ochre Jelly
See Jelly, Ochre on page 98.

Salamander*
Salamanders are large, lizard-like creatures from the elemental planes.  They are sometimes found on the material plane; they can arrive through naturally-occurring dimensional rifts, or they may be summoned by high-level Magic-Users.  Due to their highly magical nature, they cannot be harmed by non-magical weapons.
Flame, frost, and lightning salamanders hate each other, and each type will attack the others on sight in preference to any other nearby foe.

Troglodyte
See Lizard Man on page 107.

